>> Welcome to bring your job applications
to Mac OS X Leopard.
I'm Matt Drantz and the sharing technology's
evangelists cover a bunch of technologies on Mac OS X
but Java is among them and some of you
might know me as Java DTS over the years.
So I've got a long and storied history with Java
on Mac OS X going all the way back to
10.0, actually going back to classic.
So this is still a topic that's near and dear to my heart.
And no there is no caring technology's evangelists.
This is the second step in the Java world
tour that we're giving you this week at WWDC.
This morning you heard Tom give you kind of the ten
thousand foot view of what we're doing with Java on the Mac
and what's going on right now,
what's coming in Leopard and beyond.
For the next hour we're going to talk about the basic
fundamental things that you need to know if you're coming
to the Mac, if you're just starting
to look at Java on the Mac,
and even if you're somebody who's
already working with Java on the Mac.
You know, it's still a useful review for the things
that you really need to just kind of have wired
in your brain for you to do your daily work.
And tomorrow of course we're going to have all
the stuff that allows you to go the extra mile
and do some really special things kind of
like what you saw in this morning's demos.
So if nothing else, if you fall asleep, if you walk out
early, any of the above, what I really want you guys
to take home is that Mac OS X really is a great
platform for you to do your job of development on.
Whether you're a cross platform developer or
somebody who's got newer existing work that you need
to maintain compatibility in and portability with.
Maybe you've just got a massive
existing investment in Java that you need
to carry forward and the Mac is included in that picture.
Or if it just happens to be the language that you're most
familiar with and you happen to have a Mac in your lap.
All of those people, all those things
apply perfectly and Java's well at home
and it has a healthy present and healthy future here.
And while you're here we've got a thing we used to say back
in two thousand one was come for the job stay for the Cocoa.
We've got a lot of other things available both you
know, Mac features, things like Cocoa and dashboard,
the stuff like core animation you're
seeing here on the platform,
as well as plenty of open standards
and stuff like PHP, Rubi on Rails.
So you know, Java is well at home and
we've got plenty of other things to offer.
So we hope you look all around the system and continue
to be productive with your technology of choice.
So the audience here, who are we talking to?
Well so forgive me for generalizing a little
bit but you know you saw this, this morning,
there's a couple of general audiences and general
application spaces in terms of Java development.
The first of course is the server
command line, headless realm.
Whether it's you know, big enterprise deployments
or just kind of the unsung hero's sorts of things
that you have running in the background during
your daily life or your daily work environment.
And then beyond that we start to head towards
more user-centric, publicly facing things.
Things like applets.
Just a small bundle of code that you want to deploy
across a network to any number of anonymous clients,
you don't care who they are, you don't care what
they're running, the stuff should just work.
Web Start is another example of that.
You know, more modern version of what
applets were originally solving for you.
And then of course all the way at the other end of the
spectrum we have the full blown proper desktop application.
So as it turns out we could probably
generalize even a little bit more and just kind
of break this up between the client and the server.
Whether the things you need to know when you're
doing headless server command line base development
versus what you need to know when
you're doing desktop development.
And despite those two things being in stark contrast to
each other, they are similar in the sense that when you're
on a certain target platform there are
things you want to be mindful of and things
that you really need to know going in and moving forward.
So that's what we're going to cover today.
We're going to start with the very basics of Java
on Mac OS X, the things you absolutely need to know,
the things you're not going to get anywhere without.
We'll talk about the transition to
64-bit, following up on the news
that you heard this morning at the discover Java session.
And then we'll go into the Java desktop
experience and kind of what that means to you
as a cross platform desktop developer or programmer.
And we'll also talk about what you do in terms of
the routine of building your code and you know,
how you can work in some of these platform
sensitivities to your normal routine.
So let's start with the basics.
The basics are pretty simple, they're pretty basic.
We have the Java VM framework, which you know, is like
Tom said this morning: Java's preinstalled on every copy
of Mac OS X going all the way back to 10.0.
We've got multiple version support inside that framework
and there are a number of things you want to know
if you're going to go ahead and work
with this installation on the Mac.
So let's talk about the framework.
Again it's preinstalled on every
system, you don't ever have to worry
about whether or not there is a Java VM on the system.
It's always there.
Not only is it there, or is it in place, but
the JDK is there as well and it's on the path.
You don't need to worry about tweaking
the environment or anything like that.
You open up terminal, you type Java or
Java C, Java H, and it's just there.
So this is really, Java is and always
has been an integral part of the OS.
And you see here in this screen shot
here, you see a bunch of .frameworks.
For those of you who are new to the platform or not
necessarily familiar with the native things that are going
on here, our framework is really just a bundle,
it's just a folder with some specific metadata
and some folder organization and basically
in order to kind of illustrate this fact,
we've bundled the entire JDK inside a framework.
And this gives us a number of not only pre-installation,
but a number of benefits like multiple version support.
And echoing what you heard this morning, 1.5
remains the preferred recommended version on Leopard.
So more on these multiple versions.
If you were to dive a little deep, and feel
free to follow along while I talk here,
if you were to dive into the framework inside
the finder, you'd see a versions directory.
And you see a bunch of numbers here.
So you notice that a bunch of these are actually sim links.
And the real take away here is that for any given
major version we only have a single installation.
So you see here there's a 1.4, a 1.4.1,
and those are actually both sim links to 1.4.2
which is usually more often than not the
absolute most latest available JDK on the system.
So for example in Leopard, if you've gone
and downloaded our DP seven for 1.6
at the current time you would have 1.4.2_14,
1.5.0_11 and 1.6.0_01.
Similarly you see the abstract
1.5 sim link pointing
to what is currently the most current version 1.5 oh.
Now again reiterating from this morning, you need to
remember that 1.4 is being deprecated in Leopard.
So deprecation means a lot of things to a lot of people.
But this is a developer's conference, you guys are
developers and you're looking to work with this language
with this framework moving forward
so really as far as you're concerned,
you should act as if 1.4 is already gone.
Because it's not going to be around for much longer.
It will be there on Leopard as long as Leopard
is around, but you should assume that no further.
So 1.5 remains the preferred version
for multiple architecture support,
for multiple OS support, for maximum penetration basically.
So how do you deal with all these multiple JDK versions?
Well you can set your IDE preferences.
There's a bunch of IDEs out there and most of
these tools have been written custom, not custom,
but written to work properly on Mac OS X. So you tell it
which version you want, the id takes care of it for you.
That of course includes Xcode.
You can also use the Java preferences.app.
And for those of you who weren't
at the session this morning,
the Java Preferences application now also
controls the command line in Leopard.
So it's no longer just for double clickables or for Web
Start and applets, it controls every aspect of Java.
Now if you want rapid access to these, do some testing,
the main recommendation we have for your guys is
to use the Alias command and use it in your
terminal profiles on a per user basis.
This is really the most flexible and
the easiest way to go ahead and do it.
And if you've got make file or shell script, etcetera,
it depends on something like a Java home variable,
you can go ahead and set that accordingly.
And basically that's going to be
a direct path into the framework.
System library frameworks, JavaVM.framework,
versions, whichever version you wish, and then home.
And now I'd like to give you a little
quick tour of what all this looks like.
So go to demo please.
Ah there we are.
So let's open up the terminal and like I said,
there's no path shenanigan's or anything like that.
Everything just works.
So I'm going to go ahead and just
type Java -version
and like I said 1.5 is the preferred
and it's 1.5.0_11.
So maybe I want to go ahead and
do some testing with 1.4.
I'm a little slow on the uptake, I have
not downloaded the 1.6 preview yet.
But so Java preferences is located
in the utilities folder under Java.
But I'm just going to go ahead and launch
it from Spotlight because I'm lazy.
And you can see down here we have
Java application runtime settings.
Right now J2SE 5.0 and here you
would see all of the installed versions.
So if I had 1.6 installed you
would see JavaSE 6.0 up here.
So I'm just going to go ahead and drag
1.4 two to the top and click save.
And sure enough, I type Java -version.
Now we have 1.4.2_14.
So simple as that.
Now let's take a look at these, let's take
a look at the framework on the file system
for a second just to show you what's going on here.
Again system library frameworks, JavaVM.framework
and we have this versions directory.
And again this is very similar to the slide you just saw.
We've got a lot of sim links pointing
to whatever the most current thing is.
So if you happen to be doing something
that requires 1.4 or 1.5,
try to use the most abstract thing
like 1.4 and 1.5.
Not, nothing more specific than that.
Because these sim links are generally always there
and they will always point to the right thing.
And from there, you can see that
we've just got a replication
of all the command line tools for each individual version.
So here's the 1.5, I go over to 1.4, it's
got the same folder structure, same executables.
So basically all this stuff is in place and
this is all usable exactly where it sits.
And so where it starts to get interesting now is, especially
in an automated testing situation, well maybe I, you know,
this is a manual process using
this Java preferences application.
So what can we do here?
Well I can go ahead and just create a profile
for my user account, for terminal and I can do,
I can use the alias command, I can go alias Java 1.4
equals and I'm hoping all of you have experimented with drag
and drop in terminal, but basically I'm just
going to go get the Java executable right here,
change it, no this is the same login session.
So I'll create a new tab real quick.
And now I've got this Java 1.4 executable basically.
A little dash there, and right.
So now we have you know, for all intensive
purposes, an executable using 1.4.
Let's go back here, let's do it again for 1.5,
commands, Java and of course you do this for Java C,
everything else, whatever you want it to do.
So quit out of that, another new session, and there we are.
So, so in the matter of seconds, we've
got multiple version support ready to go,
ready to automate using shell scripts, whatever you want.
So very straightforward, very simple and I want to
point this out because depending on who you talk to,
which mailing list you subscribe to,
there's a lot of talk about this current JDK
and changing sim links and stuff like that.
Please don't do that.
The main reason there is not only because you don't
own the framework but because changing sim links
at the system level affects all users of the system.
This is not only easy, it's non-disruptive
and it also only affects you.
So don't listen to those people.
Listen to me.
I'll take good care of you.
Back to slides please.
So that was a quick whirlwind tour of just
you know, getting your bearings on the system.
So once we get into the runtime, once we start actually
executing code and maybe you're doing some special K stuff
or maybe you just, for whatever reason,
want to know that you're running
on Mac OS X. Very simple stuff using standard J2SE APIs.
This is probably something that many of you
have done on this platform or on other ones.
But here's the recommended way of doing it.
Go ahead and get the os.name system properties, slam it to
lower case so you don't have to worry about case sensitivity
and check that it begins with Mac OS X. I don't believe
we're changing the name of the product anytime soon.
So it's a pretty good guess.
And this code actually is not Mac specific at all, this
is just some simple code that you might be doing to try
to figure out which major version you're doing.
So you know I have this big long string that says
1.5.0_11 - something or other.
So this is a way to just kind of trim off the first couple
of characters there and see which major JDK you're using.
And more specific to the Mac is, and I apologize
for not pointing this out directly in terminal,
but we have a unique version string at
the end of what you're used to seeing.
So like I said before let's say
there's 1.4.2_11.
Or is it twelve, fourteen, where are we now?
Fourteen? Alright.
So that's the standard JDK version but because we don't
operate on the same schedule as Sun we may very well put
out two releases in the 1.4.2_14 timeframe.
So we add a little string at the end
to differentiate our own releases.
And that's something that you can count on
if it just so happens that there's something,
a feature you've been waiting for, a bug you've
been waiting to be fixed and work around,
apply a work around on, this is
the way to go ahead and do that.
Basically sniff out that hyphen at
the end and find out the number.
And this number is fairly deterministic
so you can go ahead and extrapolate on it.
But mainly you would want to check for the exact
string just so you know what release you're on.
And we have a technical note, it's TN 2110 up
on developer.apple.com that has a matrix of all
of these version strings dating all
the way back to Mac OS X 10.0.
2 1 1 0.
So on the topic of native libraries, those of you, maybe
you're building JNI code, maybe you're just bringing
down some open source stuff, whether it be on the
command line or on the desktop, it's the standard story,
you would use the Java.library.path property
to define where you're libraries are sitting.
And the naming convention here is lib.JNIlib
and the  would be the same string
that you pass into your system load
library call in your Java code.
So very straight forward, the prefix and suffix are unique
to Mac OS X. And of course you want to build these libraries
as three way universal, meaning PowerPC,
and Intel and 64-bit Intel as well.
Got a lot of different machines out there
now so you need to be mindful of all of them.
Speaking of 64-bit, I'd
like to bring Victor Hernandez
from the VM team up to talk to you about that transition.
Victor?
( Applause )
>> Well thank you Matt.
I'm Victor Hernandez and I'm one of the engineers who
brings the virtual machine to you for running on Mac OS X.
So about an hour ago I decided to drink
some coffee even though I regularly don't
because you can't really trust a VM engineer
who works on Java and doesn't drink java.
But too there's another reason as well.
64-bit JVMs are going to enable
a whole new set of amped up applications
and it's really not just the new architecture.
But it's a new way of being able to write applications
that you never felt you were able to write before.
So let's jump into the technology.
You've heard a lot about 64-bit support in Leopard.
Most of our machines that we're selling now
are able to run 64-bit applications.
And Leopard has been updated so that
most of the frameworks and almost all
of the tools including Java have
been updated for 64-bit.
We've included a 64-bit JVM ind the
J2SE 5.0 implementation in Mac OS X Leopard.
And we expect to continue providing 64-bit
JVM support in all the future versions of Java.
So what does 64-bit mean to you as a Java developer?
Well 64-bit in an application
just means that the pointer size has gone
from 32-bit up to 64-bit.
That's it.
What does Java care about that
Well the key thing is that Java as a language
has never exposed pointers or pointer size.
Your application doesn't need to know and
actually it's kind of hard to figure it out.
And that's really powerful.
It's the job of the virtual machine
to do this all under the covers.
And your application is able to run on a 64-bit
JVM without having to change any Java source
and also without having to recompile it all.
Which means the transition for you to 64-bit JVM is
going to be really, really easy to do and it's just going
to be really painless and it's going to be pretty awesome.
You're going to see how we're enabling this so that you
can actually switch into this without much work at all.
So now that you know that it's really
easy to do, what does it actually enable
Well there's two main things that it let's you do.
First of all, it lets you have a larger Java heap size.
In the current 32-bit world, t2hat Java
heap has had a maximum limit of 2GB.
A lot of you have been telling us that's too
little and we're perfectly aware of that.
Let's say this is 2GB.
How big is the new Java heap size?
Well it's not, I can't even point to the largest
amount because it's really, really that much bigger.
The key thing to note is that it's definitely
more, it can definitely be larger than the amount
of actual physical memory you have in your system.
And so you're actually going to be able to take
full advantage of all that memory you've been buying
for your machine directly from your Java application.
There's another really important thing that
you're going to get with 64-bit JVM
and that's actually performance changes including
performance improvements in your application.
Okay so I've said that this isn't just a new
architecture, this is actually an architecture
that lets you rethink how you've
approached your applications.
And that's really, really true.
Anytime that you've had to change the architecture
of your application to say oh no I can't do
that because it will use too much memory.
Well undo all of that experience, undo all of
that negative learning and just say okay what
if I had all that memory what could I do now?
The key thing is not only do you have a large Java heap,
but also if you've been accessing a lot of memory outside
of the Java heap using new IO buffers, those
can also be much larger than they were before.
And this allows a lot of new, this allows
applications to do a lot of new things.
First of all anything processing large data
sets can suddenly process even larger data sets.
Things like gene sequencing or image files, the files
that they're reading off of the disk can now be really big
and actually live all in one piece in memory.
And also applications like scientific
visualization and simulation.
These are applications that generate
a ton of data during their runtime.
They might start off with a small set of data but
then they iterate, they run all these algorithms
and it just grows, and grows, and grows and grows.
And then it might actually spit out just a
small amount of data from the conclusions.
Now these applications are enabled.
So whether it be that you're writing, you're reading big
things off of the disk or you're actually generating a lot
of data, both of those styles of
applications can now be a lot more powerful.
Also on the enterprise side, have you ever
wanted to cache your whole database in memory?
Well now it's actually possible.
And that's really, really big.
You're going to reduce your transaction
the latency for each of your transactions
and just going to be that much more powerful.
I mean, this is just an unlimited set
of the things that I can think of.
But I'm really excited to see what's going to be
coming out of the next generation of applications.
Okay. So I've explained how you can go
about, you know, amping up your application.
Or if you're current application has memory
limits now you can you know, undo those limits.
Well great those two situations, it's pretty obvious
and it's pretty clear why you would
want to move to 64-bit JVM.
But what about the rest of you that are just,
my application runs fine in a 32-bit.
When am I going to adopt this technology?
Well there's one thing that I want you to take away from
my talk today and that's the fact that the time is now.
There's really no reason not to use
this technology as soon as you can.
Which is going to be with Mac OS X Leopard.
And I'm going to go into a few more motivating
slides just to explain the reasons behind that.
So for service I deployments it's really straight
forward, for desktop jobs it's the same thing,
your application's going to look the same all the frameworks
are going to be available to you that you're currently used
to using from your pure job application and also
it's going to be a little bit faster as you'll see.
Okay. So you need to know about four
characteristics of your performance that are going
to be changing as you move to 64-bit JVM.
d
First of all how fast is your application going to be?
Secondly is it going to use more memory?
Third how much more time is going
to be spent in garbage collection?
And fourth, is your launch time
going to change for your application?
Alright first of all, speed.
For a lot of applications the speed of your application
is dictated by how fast your hottest methods are.
That's the whole design of the hot spot Java virtual machine
that we ship with Mac OS X. We take your hottest methods
and we compile them down to native machine instructions.
If we do a really good job of that, it's going to be fast.
If we don't do that, it's going to be slow.
Well the key thing is that we are actually able to
generate faster and better implementations of your methods
and native instructions on the 64-bit version
dof Intel than on the 32-bit version of Intel.
Why? Because there's more registers available.
More registers means that we can actually cache more of
your variables in the code we generate instead of having
to write your variable to memory and read it back.
This is going to be faster and we've
already seen improvements that show
that this is definitely the case
with the SciMark, benchmark.
The SciMark Benchmark doesn't spend much
time in IO, isn't spending a lot of time
or any time reading and writing from sockets.
It's really just raw computation and just hot methods.
As you can see on all parts of the benchmark,
we're already doing much better when running
with the 64-bit Java virtual machine in Leopard.
And this is just the beginning.
I mean, currently the number's 39%.
I'm hoping that you guys are possibly salivating right now
like oh cool I can get all that extra performance for free.
Alright, the second thing you need to know about when
it comes to the different performance characteristics
for your application with the 64-bit VM is memdory.
Your application is going to use more memory.
That's because every reference to one of
your job objects you have is twice as large.
It was like this now it's twice as big.
That's just the reality of 64-bits.
But that's actually, the way you're currently
approaching memory usage in the 32-bit world,
is exactly what you just need to continue
doing in the 64-bit world.
Don't use any more memory than you have to.
Measure different Java heap sizes, make sure you're
not encountering out of memory errors, and that's it.
Make sure that you're not causing other applications
on the system to page out or your own application.
There is a really easy way to make
your own application to page out.
If you actually ask for a Java heap size that's larger
than the actual amount of physical memory you have,
you're going to end up paging a lot because we
scan that whole heap during garbage collection.
And you should stay away from that.
Possibly even have dynamic code that detects
how much memory a particular deployment has
so that it modifies the heap size accordingly.
And there's two things I also need to point
out with memory usage on the 64-bit.
First of all even though you can have a larger
heap you can still end up running into out
of memory error for the same reason as before.
A leak. A leak is still going to fill up the whole heap.
It just might take a bit longer.
Also a lot of the applications, especially applications
that aren't under your control, that are Java apps,
have hard coded values for the
different heap size parameters.
We've seen this under Eclipse, we've seen
this with Idea, basically if you just move it
to 64-bit JVM it will hit an out of memory because
it doesn't fit in that space and you actually just need
to increase it to something slightly bigger.
So keep that in mind when you're trying out third
party applications under the new 64-bit JVM
which you're going to be doing because
you're going to see how easy it is to do.
Alright the third topic that I want
to talk about is garbage collection.
If you're already using a larger Java heap it's
actually going to take longer to scan all of that.
That is if you continue using the current GC algorithm.
But that's no reason to fret because we've been shipping
since Java 1.4 different garbage collection algorithms
that actually are to and specifically for this scenario.
All of the 64-bit Intel
machines have multiple cores.
Why don't we use the extra processing power to do
some asynchronous or parallelized garbage collection.
In fact there's a good chance that your pause time
might even go down which is really, really awesome.
The parallel GC algorithm basically
parallelizes the synchronize GC algorithm
and then there's also the concurrent mark sweep
where you basically have a processor that's running
during your application and then when it actually has
to do some syncronist garbage collection
it's actually reduced the amount of the work.
So it ends up being a lot fast as
far as the pause time is concerned.
So just take a look at these algorithms, measure
with the application and you're going to see
that you're not actually going to end up seeing much
larger GC pauses for a reasonable sized job of heaps.
Alright and then the fourth issue is launch time.
You're in a really interesting position
because you can be an early adopter
of the 64-bit technology of at one Leopard.
In fact not only could your application
be the first 64-bit app
out there it could also be the first
one that a user launches on the system.
Well that's really awesome and something to be proud of.
There is a cost though of course.
If you're the first app, you're going
to be the first one to load in all
of the 64-bit versions
of the frameworks into memory.
And that is going to reduce your launch time.
No reason to fret because there's going to be some quick
adoption on the 64-bit technology and as more
and more apps, basically as one more app before your
app is run, you're not going to see that cost at all.
And it's just going to get that much better.
Okay so now that you know like why you want to go about
using the 64-bit VM you need to know how to do that.
Well we're supporting it in J2SE 5.0 and Leopard, we're
also supporting in the Java SE 6 preview and it runs on all
of the 64-bit enabled Intel Mac computers.
And there's different rules on how to
go about doing it from the command line
in your application bundles and also in Web Start.
So let's go into these.
It's really easy, really, really easy.
Command line you add one new parameter
to the command line -d64.
That's absolutely it.
Cool. Next application bundle, not much harder at all.
It's got a little caveat that I've got to explain though.
You basically add a new key to
your info.plist JVMArchs.
And what this key, it's value, what it says,
is my application supports these architectures.
If you're pure Java, right off
the bat you can support them all.
If you have native code, you have to list the ones that
you've actually built your libraries universal for.
And the key thing here is that the order matters.
So if you want to specify that if there is
64-bit available on an Intel machine,
you actually do want to run in 64-bit.
d
You put x86_64 in front of
i386 otherwise you reverse that.
And that's application bundles.
The third one is Web Start, as easy as the command line.
You just need to make sure -d64 gets
passed to the Java VM created by Web Start and you do
that in the J2SE version field of the JNLP file.
Once again not very hard.
There might be more work for you
if you have native libraries.
First of all you have to make sure that your
source can be ported over to 64-bits.
You can learn more about that porting process
at other 64-bit sessions here at WWDC.
The key thing is that just like in
previous years the transition from PowerPC
to Intel meant that you had a 2-way universal binary.
Now you're going to have a 3-way universal
one and you just need to add one architecture
to your make files, x86_64.
And hopefully that won't be too hard to do either.
Okay so that's really all you need to know about it.
I hope I've really motivated you to use the 64-bit
VM because it is really going to be a painless process
and we really hope that Java is one of the
places where it gets adopted as soon as possible.
So thank you.
Back to Matt.
( Applause )
>> Thank you Victor.
So that was the guts view, everything underneath.
Let's talk a little bit about Java on the desktop.
The thing to keep in mind is when you're deploying cross
platform portable desktop applications yes you can write
Java code and compile it and have
it execute just about anywhere,
write once run anywhere, that's what we've always said.
But when you get into a desktop experience
there really is more to it than that
and it's important that everybody realizes it.
Today's operating systems, there are more of them
than ever, there are more successful ones than ever
and they've branched off in a bunch of different directions.
And users are more sophisticated and
unfortunately pickier than they've ever been.
And that jar file alone, that executable code is not
necessarily enough to just kind of get you up to snuff,
that one jar file is not going to really look
right in place here and here and here and here.
So these are things that you know obviously
you've saved yourself some time by writing a ton
of core logic that's going to work everywhere.
But if you really want to be successful alongside
all of these other things it's going to be up to you
to pay attention, not just on the
Mac but in other places as well.
What is it going to take to have users not, the goal
basically is to have users not know what you've done.
Now somebody like my dad doesn't know what Java is he's
not going to know whether something is written in Java
but he may very well know that there's something
not quite right with what he's looking at.
So I can talk to you, I can't talk about the other
ones but I can tell you what Mac users expect.
First of all they expect a self-contained
relocated, relocatable application bundle.
A double-clickable like you saw this
morning with the Maple and Cineshot demos.
They expect very easy installation.
We're going to talk about that and you know,
how easy it is for you to give that to them.
And they, if nothing else, they expect a native menu bar.
And we've gone out of our way over the years
to make this as easy as possible for you to do.
So let's start with the first point.
By now I'm sure you've seen the keynote,
you've seen your build of Leopard,
here's the new cover flow view of the finder.
Now the thing to take home here is that just browsing
around the hard drive is becoming immersive,
more visual, more personal experience.
So just think long and hard, if you've
got something that you're thinking
of deploying, is it really going to work out here?
I've got iTunes, I've moved down to mail, and
then I've just got this jar file hanging out here.
Does this jar file run on Mac OS X?
Absolutely.
Does this jar file look good right
between mail and photo booth?
Not exactly.
So what can we do about that?
Well fortunately it's very, very easy.
Looking like you belong on Mac OS X is actually not
that hard and it certainly is not a portability issue.
Creating one of these bundles is super simple.
They're basically self contained folders that can be moved
anywhere without affecting the execution of the application.
They're relocatable and they're
really easy for you to create.
Even in an automated fashion.
And there are a lot of people who get this.
You saw Cineshot and Maple this morning
who are doing really wonderful stuff.
But even the tools.
I mean if there's anybody who can get away with kind of not
going the extra mile to fit in it's developer tools, right?
My audience is a bunch of developers they can go
ahead and read, they can go to the wikies, whatever.
But even these guys, even the Eclipses and NetBeans and
the Ideas, they get it, they understand what it takes
to just really at least look like
you've downloaded the right thing.
And so I'd like to thank them for doing that as well.
So let's talk about bundles and what, you
know, what's the deal with these bundles.
We'll talk about if you have a finished product
that you're just bringing over to the platform,
you don't need to make any code
changes, the best way to do that.
We'll go into kind of under the covers
and see what these bundles are made of
and what's specific to Java applications.
Then we'll talk about adapting your daily or regular
build routine to kind of do this in a very simple fashion
because we want you to do it, we want it to be easy for you.
And then we'll talk about how you can go ahead
and deploy those and get them into the hands
of your users the best way, the way that they expect.
So to start, bundling a finished product.
I've got my jar or jars in my resources, you know,
I've got a shell script most likely,
how do I make a bundle out of this?
Well we have a great tool called Jar
Bundler, it makes this very easy.
You basically just drop everything into the resources tab.
We set your class path, we create the folder structure, we
set all the relevant properties, you can add other things
in like whatever you would normally specify
in the command line, or in the environment,
and we've even got a great tool called Icon Composer
which can get you a little desktop
icon in just a couple of seconds.
And I'd like to show you that right now.
Okay. So I'd like to show you a little random
app that I pulled down from SourceForge.
It's called jscicalc and you know, I'm a
developer so this is not too scary to me,
but again my dad is not going to be a big fan of this.
So I call my dad and I tell him okay you've
got to type all this stuff in terminal.
Not the best idea, but let's go
ahead and see what they've done.
As it turns out they've gone ahead and at least
put a manifest file in here so it's not going
to be too bad, too hard to at least run it.
Oh darn. What's happened here?
Unsupported class version.
So this looks like it was built for one
five and I happen to be running 1.4.
I'm going have to hack the sim link
again or change the preferences.
Well no because we already did all
that alias stuff in the previous demo.
I can just go ahead and select Java 1.5.
And now it's running, beautiful.
So here we are.
And the first thing you notice is
actually this looks pretty good.
You know it's pure job application, we've
got all the aqua look and feel pre-installed
and one thing you should notice right away is
we've actually got an application menu up here
and at the moment it's using the fully qualified
main class name for the application name.
We'll take care of that in a second.
So we're getting there.
The thing at least runs.
But what we'd really like to do is
give this a better desktop presence.
All these other files here, we don't actually need.
So I'm going to go ahead and launch Jar Bundler.
And very simple app, I'll go over here to the
class path and files tab, drag this jar in,
you see it when ahead and set the class path for me already?
And the main class, I saw it up
in the menu bar but you know,
let's assume that I don't necessarily
know what the main class is.
Let's go ahead and just give the jar file over here too
and it actually went ahead and scanned the entire jar
to find classes with the main definition in it.
Got a little quirk here, I need
to actually put a dot in here.
And you can see that we do provide you with
a generic job application icon but you know,
we would want something a little more personal, personable.
Let's see, there's actually a bunch of screenshots in here.
So let's see what they've given us here, 256,
multiple resolution, that unfortunately is not a screenshot
from Mac OS X. It's totally unacceptable.
Let's go ahead and try to just get a
good quick screen shot of our own here.
For those of you who are new to the platform
or perhaps not as much of a geek as others,
command+shift+4 will let you go ahead and
drag a region of the screen to take a screenshot.
But if you actually hit the space bar,
you can get a perfectly cropped screenshot
of any given window, including the shadow.
So quite nice, perfect.
We're all ready to go now.
I'll quit out of this again, hide this window.
So once we get this icon, it needs to
be in the Mac OS X .icons format.
So I'll open up Icon Composer, drag our new picture
in and we go ahead and it went ahead and scaled
down to all the sizes that we're going to need.
Let me save this.
calc.icons
Great, we'll drag that in.
Alright. And basically I click create application.
And save it on the desktop, call it jscicalc.
It looks like we've got a little refresh
issue and I was looking at this before.
But basically it does work I can go
ahead and launch it and there we are.
So now we've got a double clickable application which
should have an icon that we can see but not at the moment.
You can see it here on the dock.
So there we go.
If I wasn't talking so much this
would've taken less than sixty seconds.
Another thing to mention is you notice that
now the name is proper up in the menu bar.
I've gone ahead and because I specified that name
that while we were creating the application bundle,
Jar Bundler went ahead and did what was
necessary to make that happen at runtime.
And that's pretty much it for this demo.
Can we go back to slides please?
So that's the kind of quick one off situation if
you've got some stuff that's already built and you want
to throw things all over the stage,
Jar Bundler's the way to go.
Very simple very straightforward.
So what's inside this bundle?
What did we actually just create?
So let's talk about the bundle structure, all the resources
that are in there, the info plists as we call it for short,
information property list is the officially
sanctioned definition of the term.
And the application stub which is the little piece of
executable magic that makes this thing double-clickable.
So first of all the anatomy, what is this?
We just saw this bundle get created on the desktop
so if I right-click on this or control-click on it
and I click show package contents it actually brings
me right inside and it turns out this is just a folder.
It's just all that stuff that we dragged into Jar Bundler
just gets thrown into a folder with a .app extension
and then Mac OS X knows what to do with it.
I'm of course paraphrasing a little bit
but I'm about to go into more detail.
So you start with this contents directory, you go in
there and you start to see a bunch of other things.
The first thing you see is the resources directory.
Now again this is not Java specific this is
standard Mac OS X 101 bundling stuff.
If you open a Cocoa application
you're going to see the same thing.
Inside the resources directory we have that icons file
that we just created with Icon Composer but you don't know
that because we just dragged it on top of jar
bundler and then we also have this Java directory.
Obviously being called Java this
is some Java specific stuff.
So what's in here?
Well in this case a very simple application.
It's just a jar file.
But other things like images that you're going
ahead and loading using the tool kit, JNI libraries,
all that stuff is going to go here
in the Java resources directory.
So again that's Contents/Resources/Java off the top of the
bundle, JNI libs, jar files and also raw class directories
if that's how you've been deploying things.
You can throw those right in there, they're
on the class path as well as the library path
which is how the JNI libs can just be thrown in.
So really that's another thing that bundling gets you.
If you happen to be using a lot of JNI libraries, now you
don't even need to worry about Java.library.path.
Just throw it in the bundle and you're done.
So one level up at contents resources this
is now again the generic Mac OS X stuff.
Your icon file lives there as you saw, resolution
independent images, this is very relevant in Leopard
and we're going to be talking about that tomorrow.
We've made that really very easy for you to adopt as Tom
said this morning, we're going to go into detail tomorrow
as to just how to take advantage of that.
As well as nib files.
If you want to go ahead and get fancy and start adding
some real Cocoa, loadable Cocoa UI in your application,
maybe you just load it into a nib
and do what's necessary to do
that communication between the Cocoa and Java environments.
You can just drop your nib in contents resources
and then load it using your Cocoa code later.
And we'll be taking a glance at that as
well tomorrow in the advanced session.
Okay. So we've buried down into the Java area.
Let's go back up to the contents directory.
Next thing you see is this information
property list file, info plist for short.
You're going to hear people toss this around a lot.
Victor already mentioned it in terms of specifying
your preferred architectures for 32, 64.
So what is this plist file?
Well it has a lot of typical properties for any Mac OS X
operation, like the unique bundle identifier which is used
by anything from parental controls to
installers to document identification.
The display name, in other words the name that appears
up there in the application and you notice that,
that changed between running it as
a jar and running it as a bundle.
That was, that information, that name was stored
in the info plist file as well as document types.
You remember Pritique this morning double-clicked on a
Maple document and that opened up right away in Maple.
So there's some Java code that you need to write to make
that work on the runtime side but on the finder side
on the system side, it's as simple as just adding
the document types in you info plist file.
I've also got Java information there.
All the standard stuff you would normally
use outside of a bundle like class path,
main argument system properties, and the preferred version.
And we typically recommend you use the +
or * modifiers when you're specifying.
The key is called JVM version and let's say you do a 1.4
or a 1.4+, a 1.4* and basically
that gets you some insurance in case when we say
deprecated something, or altogether remove it,
this ensures that whatever version
you've requested you'll just kind
of automatically be moved forward to the next version.
Perfect example is 1.3 which is no longer on Leopard.
Somebody, any bundle out there that has
1.3+ as its preferred JVM version
in the bundle is not going to have any problems.
We're just going to use whatever
is the latest on the system.
So more concrete examples of what this plist means and
how it translates to what you would normally do in Java.
So up here you see I've got a class path variable and
I've got a main class and an argument to the main method.
All this stuff lives down in the
Java dictionary in the plist file.
So you can see we have a class path, property,
we've got main class, as well as any arguments.
And most of these things are strings but
you notice the arguments is done in array.
And for those of you who haven't used
property list editor, you can go ahead
and just very visually just click new
sibling and have these new entries.
This is actually an XML file underneath,
you're free to edit yourself.
But property list editor is a nice
abstract way of managing this.
You'll notice also the JVM version key
that's here that's specified 1.4+.
So another example would be replacing system properties,
the kind of stuff that you would
put in a -d at the command line.
So this stuff, we also have a properties
dictionary, and this is a dictionary
because it's going to support multiple versions.
Who knows how many -d arguments
you've got there on the command line.
So in this case we go ahead and just take the key
and the value and map them up into the dictionary.
So non standard VM options, the -x type stuff
that you tend to use a lot in the command line.
Also we have a VM option string and
you'll notice this is not a dictionary
like the system properties this is a string, and
that's just a Java thing that's a hotspot thing,
those non standard properties, the -x, those are all
read in and interpreted as a single string by the VM.
So we only provide that as a string.
So that's the plist file.
And it's actually if you're using something like Jar Bundler
it's actually more information than you need to know.
You actually never even necessarily have to open this file.
So there's one more thing and it's the Mac OS directory.
This is where the real executable is stored and again
this is something that every bundle, whatever language
or framework it's using is going to have.
And inside that Mac OS bundle there's a little
piece of executable code and in the case
of Java we call that the Java application stub.
So what does the stub do?
Like I said it's a little piece of executable,
it's a little executable that launches the VM,
in enables some of the launch time event handlers for
things like document handling as well as alerting your code
that the application is finished launching,
it's similar to opening documents.
The finder also has the ability to pass
off a document that you want to be printed.
All of these things are managed by the stub.
It starts its life in the framework, inside the
contents resources directory of the JavaVM.framework
and there's only one copy of it so basically
every Java release we do we update the stub.
But the stub itself is universal across JVM versions.
Now because it's copied, because your deployed
application is going to carry around a copy
of this stub everywhere it goes, we
strongly suggest updating the stub.
We do a lot of work to just kind of make it as
small as possible, as efficient as possible,
add little bells and whistles from time to time.
So whenever you get the chance go ahead and update your
stub with whatever came from the latest Java release.
Now I want to highlight that last word release.
The DVD that you receive this Monday
is not a release it is a Beta.
So please do not distribute a finished shrink
wrapped application using executables from that Beta.
And it seems like common sense but you'd be
surprised how many people actually do it.
So I felt the need to call that out.
Thank you for cooperating.
So we talked about the easy case or the one
off case but that's really not how we operate.
We go ahead and we do nightly builds maybe weekly
builds and we don't want to just get up and go to the,
go to our computer and manual use Jar Bundler every time.
So how can we do this in an automated fashion.
Well for starters our Xcode IDE of course
does application bundling very easily.
And if you're going, if you're using Ant and it's very
highly likely that you're using Ant if you're using one
of those IDEs that you saw listed before, this is a
great option because Ant is extensible, it's automatable
and like I said it's transferrable to
all of these IDEs the most popular ones.
So we've got all the pieces we need so what do we do?
Well what's great about the new Xcode
in Leopard is that we've re-tasked all
of our Java application templates to use Ant.
So when you're building, when you
start a Java application in Xcode,
a Java project in Xcode it's really just an Ant project.
And you're going to see that in a second.
And we've got a package subtask.
We've got an Ant-based task now that
creates the application bundle for you
and that's something you can go ahead
and just use and reappropriate anywhere.
So if you happen to not even be building
on Mac OS X there's an option for you.
And I would like to show you that right now.
Get this calculator out of the way.
So first thing I need is a PC and they're kind of hard to
come by in this building so I'm going to call on our friends
from Parallels of course to save me some time and trouble.
Of course this Is a demo so I've got something all ready.
I've got this Java project here I'm going to
just go right to DOS and go to the desktop.
I'll go ahead in here and let's see
what this looks like over in Explorer.
So right, Ant-based project, very simple stuff.
Let's run it.
Oh it looks pretty good that font there.
I thought the command prompt would be small.
So right. Typical Java application,
nothing special, it's running on Windows.
Fantastic.
But what does this actually getting us?
What's being built?
Well there's really nothing in here other
than some build stuff, there's a jar in here
and we've already been through that routine right?
This is not good enough anymore.
So what are we going to do?
I'm building on Windows I don't have a Mac in front of me.
Let's go over to Xcode.
Let's just use a Mac for a couple
of minutes if you can manage.
I'll start a new project, and lets
create a new Java application
and I will call it, put it in temp, I'll call it test.
So the first thing you notice, looking at all the files
in here, is this is very clearly an Ant-based project.
So all I've done is file new and I've
got an Ant project in front of me right?
So and you know, we're not even going to build and run
this all we're going to do is pay attention to the things
that are specific to the Macs, specific to the bundle.
We've got this resources_Mac OS X
directory, again this is part of the template.
This is not a precooked demo.
We've got our plist file, we've got our
icons file, those were those two things
in that anatomy, in those anatomy slides that we needed.
There's one other thing we need and that's the stub.
So let's go get it.
System/library/frameworks/JavaVM.framework/resources
/Mac OS.
Mac OS. There we are.
Now I'm just going to actually drag,
actually, no I need to view this in finder.
I'm just going to go head and drag the stub in here.
So now we've got everything we need and the idea here
is that we're just going to move this over in a moment.
So let's see what's going on in the build out XML file.
Like I said there's a package subtask here so let's
go down here to package, let's see what's going on.
And right here is your Ant task, this
is what does the packaging for you.
So it's basically ready to go.
There's one thing we need to do here
which is get rid of this Unix executable
since we're not going to be building on Unix of course.
Let me copy this.
And because Parallels is so awesome, I
can just start moving this stuff over.
Actually I'm going to, excuse me,
let's go get this folder first.
Start by copying over the resources
Mac OS X folder, copy, back over here
and there's our resources Mac OS X. Open this guy with WordPad,
I've got this on the paste board, did I just, yes I did.
I just pasted it twice.
Okay we'll go down to once.
So we've got a bunch of properties here like
application.resources.Javaapplication.Mac OS.
Obviously these are specific to our Xcode project.
Let's go get those as well.
Resources Mac OS, come on, okay.
WordPad. Let's go up to the top here and I could've
prebaked this but basically I just want to show you guys
that there's no trickery here and
that it's very straightforward.
So and the other thing we want to do is you might notice
that there's a hard link to the
framework for the stub right now.
So let's go ahead and change that to resources/Mac
OS X. And that should be all that we need to do.
Oh actually I need to change, of course I need
to include the file name, and let's see here.
Let's try our new package task.
Build successful.
Yeah well, we'll see.
Let's see, let's go in the disk directory and test that app.
And like I said, if you didn't believe
me before, windows is backing me up.
This is really just a folder.
Obviously Windows doesn't know what do
with that, let's go ahead and zip it.
Suck it over here.
There we go we've got our application
it's got an icon, and wow it runs.
( applause )
So even if you're not using the Mac to build
and deploy and obviously we would like you to.
But if that's the case we understand.
There's really no reason to not
be doing this to not give yourself
that proper desktop image, that proper desktop presence.
I mean this is no brainer stuff.
And we've done it in just a few minutes.
And at this point once you've got it
into Ant you can do it every night.
Back to slides please.
So a little about deployment.
The typical distribution mechanism for double
clickable applications on Mac OS X is a disk image.
You can think of it as an ISO if
you're from the windows world.
And this is one thing that will require having a Mac on your
hands because we do have a command line tool called hdiutil
that will allow you to create a disk image.
If you don't have a Mac on your hands,
you don't have one that's automatable,
you can go ahead and just create a tar ball.
A tar plus gzip or standard zip like I just
did as you saw me dragging out of Parallels.
If nothing else, what we really expect, or what our users
really expect is to just be able to drag with a thing.
That's the whole point of making these
application bundles is it's one file on the system
that has everything that's needed to run the
application which is really not too much to ask.
And it just works.
Now this is a good example, this  MarsEdit package.
This is a disk image and when the image is mounted
you'll see this nice, they've done a little extra
and they've put a custom background in the actual
window itself and they've also included an alias,
a sim link to the applications folder, which
is a known, you know, deterministic place.
So this is actually a sim link to /applications
and it works on every system of course.
So the user doesn't even have to open a
new window to perform the drag install,
they just move it a couple pixels to the right.
And if you're a move complicated application like
Maple, you saw this morning they've got a lot
of sample code they've got a lot of
sample projects, a lot of supporting files
that don't necessarily make sense to go into the bundle.
You can use an installer, we of course
would like you to use our installer,
our PackageMaker tool creates installation bundles.
And you can see the Maple guys as Pritique pointed out this
morning actually did create a Mac OS X installer package.
So the final thing is the screen menu
bar and I'm making a big deal out of it
but it really isn't a big deal it's kind of a no brainer.
It's very easy to adopt it's a system property.
Apple.laf.useScreenMenuBar.
It's a system property so it has
no affect on other platforms.
Set it early on whether it be in your main method,
preferably as a -d in the command line or of course
in the Java properties dictionary of your plist
and basically these swing J menu bars that normally
in a cross platform sense appear inside the window go
right up to the top just where we would expect them to be.
And of course as a last resort for whatever reason, you can
go ahead and set that in code using System.setProperty.
If you're going to go that route,
you want to do that, like I said,
very early like right at the top of your main method.
But if nothing else before the AWT is loaded.
Because we only check for this property once.
So before you call tool kit, get default tool kit before
you instantiate a J frame, anything like that you want
to make sure this property is set
and doing the system property
and the command line and the p
list is a good way to do that.
So we're going to go into this
in a little more detail tomorrow.
But we have a couple of extension APIs
that allow you to take advantage of this,
this application menu that you've
been seeing in all these demos.
Now obviously I haven't written any code to do that.
That menu just appears.
That's one of the things we provide to you just to make
it that much easier to look like you belong on the system.
You get that menu for free.
And we allow you to do simple things like
set properties to customize the name there.
Now there's a bunch of actionable things in there thought
in particular the about menu, there's a preferences item,
and most importantly there's a quit item.
And that's the one I really want to highlight today.
Because every application has a quit event.
Including yours.
As soon as you launch a Java application
on Mac OS X and load the AWT you're going
to get an application menu with a quit menu item.
A functional quit menu item.
Now all of us have tear down code like you saw
Maple this morning, are you sure you want to quit?
Do you want to save this stuff?
Most of us have logic that handles that stuff immediately.
And it basically comes down to hooking whatever logic
you've already written into these APIs we provide for you.
It's very straightforward.
So implementing these quit handlers.
First you want to import the com.apple.eawt
package and you want to write a simple listener
that implements the application let's say listener
interface or alternately implements the, excuse me,
extends the application adapter class if there's
only one method you actually want to override.
So in this case we're overriding handle quit which receives
an application event that's another one of our EAWT classes
and really this class should not be a whole lot of code.
Like I said, if you've written an application on Windows
or Linux and you've got your are you sure logic already,
you just pass off to that once you receive the event.
And the event itself has a set handle method which
basically tells the system yes go ahead we're ready
to quit or alternatively, no the user cancelled.
And it's basically that simple.
In most cases it doesn't need to
be more than two lines of code.
I always forget about those builds.
And again, registering this application, very easy.
Go ahead and you have your main method again, similar
to the screen menu bar this is something you want
to do really early, because you never know when the user's
just going to get twitchy and hit command+Q. So you want
to have this handler in place very early on.
You instantiate your listener, add it to the
application class as an application listener.
You can add more than one of these but
for the most part you only ever need one.
And go ahead and implement the methods of your choice.
So I'd like to show you that right now.
We're done with Windows.
Round of applause for Parallels ladies and gentlemen.
( applause )
>> So I've got a couple of demos here of some of you
are already familiar with the OS X adapter sample.
I'm just going to go ahead and run it I'm not even
going to bother with the building at the moment.
So standard Java application, not so
standard actually it doesn't do a whole lot.
The point of the sample is to show you how
to implement the application menu items.
So we've got our about, we've got a custom about dialog.
And you know, most of you guys probably have your
info dialogue that you've already written again.
So this is just a matter of implementing this method
and passing it off to the code you've already written.
Screen menu bar is on top.
This is something I haven't mentioned by the
way and I don't know if anybody else has,
but you see this search field we have now in Leopard.
I think the name for this had been spotlight for
help, I don't know if that's the name of it anymore.
But this just works in Java so if I go ahead and type open,
it's actually searching my J menu items even
though I haven't written a single line of code
or even set a system property to do that.
It all just works.
I hit enter and I get my, do I?
No I don't.
I should be getting my open dialogue any moment now.
I wonder if this is Spaces having fun with me.
Maybe not.
So again, I also have the preferences menu item
here standard preferences dialogue and maybe not.
But more importantly let's get on to the quit menu item.
And this is a standard J option pane and
this icon we get for free because it's
of a certain alert type and we just say are you sure?
And you say no.
And we didn't quit.
You say yes, we do quit.
Now without the application handler that
we , excuse me the application listener
that we would've written nothing
would've happened here at all.
So let me show you what this looks like.
Again, we're going to extend the application
adapter class, we've got a bunch of stuff here,
handle about and you can see these
are really short methods right?
Presumably this main app class which is
our main application, has all the logic.
We're just passing off to that, setting the events
as handled as necessary, similarly handle quit.
If you want to delay or cancel the quit set
handle this false and that will reject the quit
and allow you to opt into quitting yourself.
So that's great and actually this sample goes a step
further and it actually loads this class using reflection.
So that basically you don't have to mess
around with your distribution you can go head
and ship that OS X adapter class and it will only ever be
loaded or even referenced on Mac OS X. So you can go ahead
and still distribute one code base, have it run everywhere.
And I know what you're thinking, I still have a source
file in here that's referencing com.apple.eawt.
I just showed you how to use Ant on Windows
to build something and now I'm telling you
to use apple specific APIs when you're building.
So that was OS X adapter 1.0.
Let me show you 2.0.
It's another project.
I went ahead and I built it in Leopard using ant.
So the whole picture's starting to come together.
But the adapter is a lot more interesting
than it used to be.
Obviously you can see the reflect here.
I don't want to get too dirty into the details this
is something you can download from the attendee's site
but basically what this new sample does is it uses a proxy
object to go ahead and just dynamically create an object
that responds to the handle quit, handle about
and handle preferences menu items as necessary.
So basically what that means is there's no static
reference anywhere in the code to com.apple.eawt.
So you can even build this, not only run this, but
now build it anywhere without any kind of stub files
or dummy implementations or anything like that.
( applause )
>> I'm glad you appreciate it.
I certainly worked hard on it.
So I've actually added some functionality to the app too.
So we've got something that opens here.
And in case you were wondering why would we want to do
something like open image files, well of course, oh darn.
I didn't change my document associations.
The sample of course also does the document
association that we alluded to earlier.
But I'm clearly using the wrong version of it.
And Scott will go into more detail on that on Friday.
Again it's just a matter of changing some plist
keys and implementing the handle open file method.
And as you might imagine this thing goes
ahead and builds on windows as well.
So let's see what we can do about that.
Let's go to my computer, where do I want to
go, we'll make it easy we'll go to the desktop.
That's 1.0, we want 2.0.
Let's copy this guy over here.
( keyboard clicks )
>> No, no, no.
OS X adapter.
Sure. And let's see.
And of course we can't run the double-
clickable application so let's go ahead
and do the, oh excuse me, the run jar command.
As you can see it builds and ran, so there's
no trickery, no magic or anything like that.
Another thing worth noting is you know we've got the
open dialogue here we've got the menu bar down here,
we've got an options menu in the file, excuse
me, an options menu item in the file menu.
We'll go ahead and select the background color which
doesn't show up until an image is actually loaded.
We've got a help menu here that has our about information.
Now this stuff is down in the menu bar.
Let's go back to the Mac version.
Excuse me, I should probably launch, oh
there we are, there's our quit handler.
Perfect. You notice that the file menu does not have the
options in there and the help does not have the about
and that's because I'm just conditionally in the code
checking whether or not we're on Mac OS X and I am
or am not going to include that menu
item based on where the platform is.
The same logic is there, there's no code, you know when
I go ahead and open the preferences here, it goes ahead
and brings up the same dialog you see over here on Windows.
So this stuff is very simple and once
you look at the code you realize it's not
that much work to just kind of be mindful of this.
So if you're go in here and do this work in the first
place, make sure you do it right and go the distance.
That's pretty much it.
We can go back to slides.
So the things to remember when
we're talking about the desktop.
First of all I said it in the beginning,
today's users really expect more.
You ask somebody to download something
and run a shell script
or double-click some file that's not particularly
personal, not recognizable, I can nearly guarantee you
that the average Mac user is not going
to receive that particularly well.
You really want to pay attention to
the platform and I say the platform,
the work Mac does not appear anywhere in this slide.
It's not just Mac OS X, it's basically every
desktop environment you intend to deploy to.
Make sure you think about, look at some of the
other apps whether they're written in Java or not.
Look at the other apps that are on the
platform and see why they're successful.
See what it is that makes users want to use this
app instead of the other one and cater to that.
You can do it without sacrificing portability
and without messing up your daily routine.
And obviously we'd like you to go even further
than that and do some really interesting things.
And for that, if I whet your appetite sufficiently
we're going to have a lot of interesting stuff
on Friday regarding client properties and JNI integration
that you can do in a still do in a portable fashion.
And that session is tomorrow, Friday at 3:30.
For more information you can contact
me but hopefully I've given you enough.
We also have the Java-dev mailing list, those of you
who are not on it, you really need to get on this list.
This is a fantastic mainly community driven mailing list
that's hosted by Apple, it's monitored by the engineers
that you're going to see up on stage and in the lab but
we have a tremendous number of non-Apple gurus basically.
Not just in Java but Java on the Mac.
And it's a wonderful technical resource.
And of course there's tons of stuff
on developer.apple.com.
Not only in the public site but
on the WWDC attendee site as well.
As you can guess that OS X adapter 2.0 sample is,
requires Xcode 3.0
because it's using the Ant based templates but it's really
not hard to just take all of that standardized stuff
out of the project and move it over to something else.
We have one more lab tomorrow at 10:30am so if you
didn't catch us today and you've got some more questions,
whether it be from this morning or
from this afternoon, please go ahead
and stop by and hang out with us a little bit.
So in summary, it really is just the same Java you're
used to whether been on the Mac or on somewhere else.
We'd like to think it's even better, it's a
pre-installed JDK with a switchable command line,
an easy switchable command line, we've got a 64-bit
implementation that is already ready to go.
We've got easy application bundling, we've done a lot of
work over the years to just make it as simple as possible
with as minimal effort to have you look
great alongside all these other applications
that were built using native tools
and platform specific code.
We've got built in support for Ant now so you can take a
lot of the stuff we were talking about and move it right
over to other tools or even other platforms
when you're building your projects.
And we've got some simple APIs that will let you
incorporate all the logic that you've already written
into Mac OS X specific areas like the application menu.